Create v2-1.md (#1848)
grafana/mimir: docs/sources/release-notes/v2.1.md

---
title: "Grafana Mimir version 2.1 release notes"
menuTitle: "V2.1 release notes"
description: "Release notes for Grafana Mimir version 2.1"
weight: 200
---

# Grafana Mimir version 2.1 release notes

Grafana Labs is excited to announce version 2.1 of Grafana Mimir, the most scalable, most performant open source time series database in the world. 

Below we highlight the top features, enhancements and bugfixes in this release, as well as relevant callouts for those upgrading from Grafana Mimir 2.0. The complete list of changes is recorded in the [Changelog](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/blob/main/CHANGELOG.md).

## Features and enhancements

> - **Mimir on ARM**: The `mimir build` command now builds both amd64 and arm64 Docker images, making it easier for those on arm-based machines to develop and run Mimir. Both amd64 and arm64 images will now be published to the [Mimir docker registry](https://hub.docker.com/r/grafana/mimir). Note that our existing integration test suite only uses the amd64 images, which means we cannot make any functional or performance guarantees about the arm64 images.  

Reviewer: We don't have `mimir build` command. There is `make build`, but that only builds local binary. It is possible to use `make push-multiarch-mimir` to publish multiplatform image to Docker Hub, but it requires credentials. In the end, I would suggest to not call out any specific command.

```suggestion
- **Mimir on ARM**: We now publish Docker images for both `amd64` and `arm64`, making it easier for those on arm-based machines to develop and run Mimir. Multiplaform images are available from the the [Mimir docker registry](https://hub.docker.com/r/grafana/mimir). Note that our existing integration test suite only uses the `amd64` images, which means we cannot make any functional or performance guarantees about the `arm64` images.  
```

Author: @pstibrany -- Should I mention that you can locally build arm64 images too (even if you can't push them to docker hub)?

Author: Accepted your suggestion in the meantime.

Author: Perfect - thanks for clarifying! I will leave the release notes as written then.

- **Per-tenant custom trackers for monitoring cardinality**: In Grafana Mimir 2.0, we introduced a [custom tracker feature]({{< relref "../operators-guide/configuring/configuring-custom-trackers.md" >}}) that allows you to track the count of active series over time that match a specific label matcher. In Grafana Mimir 2.1, we've made it possible to configure custom trackers via the [runtime configuration file]({{< relref "../operators-guide/configuring/about-runtime-configuration.md" >}}). This means you can now define different trackers for each tenant in your cluster and modify those trackers without an ingester restart.

> - **Reduce cardinality of Grafana Mimir's `/metrics` endpoint**: While Grafana Mimir does a good job of exposing a relatively small number of series about its own state, this number can tick up when running Grafana Mimir clusters with high tenant counts or high active series counts. To reduce this number (and the accompanying cost of scraping and storing these time series), we've made [several optimizations](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/issues/1750). Our improvements have already reduced series count on the `/metrics` endpoint of one of our internal clusters by 11%, and we expect an even greater reduction on our bigger clusters once this rolls out there.

Reviewer 2: I think we should just mention what we're sure about and avoid any reference to "our clusters".

```suggestion
- **Reduce cardinality of Grafana Mimir's `/metrics` endpoint**: While Grafana Mimir does a good job of exposing a relatively small number of series about its own state, this number can tick up when running Grafana Mimir clusters with high tenant counts or high active series counts. To reduce this number (and the accompanying cost of scraping and storing these time series), we've made [several optimizations](https://github.com/grafana/mimir/issues/1750). These improvements reduces series count on the `/metrics` endpoint by more than 10%.
```

## Upgrade considerations

We've updated the default values for 2 parameters in Grafana Mimir to give users better out-of-the-box performance:

> - We've changed the default for `-blocks-storage.tsdb.isolation-enabled` from `true` to `false`. We've marked this flag as deprecated and will remove it, setting the value permanently to `false`, in 2 releases. Our decision to do this came from our experience running our [1 billion series load test](https://grafana.com/blog/2022/04/08/how-we-scaled-our-new-prometheus-tsdb-grafana-mimir-to-1-billion-active-series/#prometheus-tsdb-enhancements), where we saw that disabling this setting reduced ingester 99th percentile latency by 90%.

Reviewer: Perhaps we should point out that TSDB isolation feature (within single ingester) doesn't bring any benefit in our architecture, where single push request is distributed to many ingesters. Mimir didn't provide isolation guarantees even with this option enabled.

Reviewer: Oh, I wouldn't add anything to the blog post, just to release notes. But if you don't think it's necessary, that's fine. You're correct that it's explained in the blog post already.

Author: I tried again! lemme know what you think.

> - The store gateway attributes cache is now enabled by default (achieved by updating the default for `-blocks-storage.bucket-store.chunks-cache.attributes-in-memory-max-items` from `0` to `50000`). This in-memory cache makes it faster to look up object attributes for chunk data. We've been running this optional cache internally for a while and upon a recent configuration audit, realized it made sense to do the same for all users. The increase in store-gateway memory utilization from enabling this cache is negligible and easily justified given the performance gains.  

Author: @pracucci updated the language. let me know what you think. I could also get rid of the 'easily justified' part of the sentence and just leave it as 'negligible memory increase'.

> - The store gateway attributes cache is now enabled by default (achieved by updating the default for `-blocks-storage.bucket-store.chunks-cache.attributes-in-memory-max-items` from `0` to `50000`). This in-memory cache makes it faster to look up object attributes for chunk data. We've been running this optional cache internally for a while and upon a recent configuration audit, realized it made sense to do the same for all users. We estimate this change will consume an additional 6MB of memory, but we believe it is well worth the performance improvement. 

Reviewer 2: > an additional 6MB of memory

That's really non significative, not even worth to mention IMO. I would just say that the extra memory took by this cache is non significative but can improve store-gateway performance.

> - The store gateway attributes cache is now enabled by default (achieved by updating the default for `-blocks-storage.bucket-store.chunks-cache.attributes-in-memory-max-items` from `0` to `50000`). This in-memory cache makes it faster to look up object attributes for chunk data. We've been running this optional cache internally for a while and upon a recent configuration audit, realized it made sense to do the same for all users. The increase in store-gateway memory utilization from enabling this cache is negligible and easily justified given the performance gains.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- The store-gateway attributes cache is now enabled by default (achieved by updating the default for `-blocks-storage.bucket-store.chunks-cache.attributes-in-memory-max-items` from `0` to `50000`). This in-memory cache makes it faster to look up object attributes for chunk data. We've been running this optional cache internally for a while and upon a recent configuration audit, realized it made sense to do the same for all users. The increase in store-gateway memory utilization from enabling this cache is negligible and easily justified given the performance gains.
```
